<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"   
      xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets" 
      xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"    
      xmlns:p="http://primefaces.org/ui" >
  <body>  
    <ui:composition>   
      <h:panelGroup styleClass="column1" layout="block" >
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="header"  layout="block" >
          <h:outputText value="#{msg.dnatext1}" /> 
        </h:panelGroup>

        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="subheader text"  layout="block" >
          <h:outputText value="#{msg.dnatext2}" /> 
        </h:panelGroup> 
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="text"  layout="block" >
          Since methods for reading DNA sequences became available, DNA has been used in research on species, particularly 
          their genetic relationships and identification. Because DNA accumulates changes (mutations) over time, DNA sequences 
          between species become more different from each other the longer the species have been distinct from each other. 
          It was only in 2003 that researchers brought worldwide attention to the idea that a specific standardized gene region 
          for animals could be used, therefore, as a new tool for identifying species. This came to be known as "DNA Barcoding", 
          translated to "DNA Barkodning" or "DNA streckkoding" in Swedish. The initial gene selected as a barcode region for the 
          animal kingdom was the mitochondrial gene cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI). When it was demonstrated that this gene 
          did not perform as well as a barcode for all organism groups, additional genes were chosen as additional barcode regions 
          for plants (chloroplast genes RbCI and Matk) and fungi (nuclear gene ITS). 
          <br />
          <br /> 
          Since 2003, researchers across the globe have been testing how effectively these gene regions serve as species identification 
          tools for different organisms and in different regions of the world. They have investigated questions such as: how large can 
          sequence variation be within species, are there always many differences between species but few differences within a species, 
          do these genes works equally well in all animal groups, how many individuals of each species should be represented in a "reference 
          library" of sequences, how widespread are false genes (called pseudogenes) in these regions, what is the effect of species hybridization, 
          which of the several methods developed to match an unknown sequence against a reference library provides the greatest reliability for 
          species determinations, and is there any difference between using regional rather than a global reference libraries? 
          <br />
          <br /> 
          These studies have led to several interesting results. First, we are now more aware of the difference between delimiting species 
          (= what we call taxonomy) and identifying specimens to species (= determination). The early years involved a lot of confusion between 
          these two activities with assertions that DNA barcoding could replace them, methods for one objective could be used for the other, etc. 
          Today we also have a rather good perspective concerning what DNA barcoding is good at accomplishing, under what conditions, and its limitations. 
          For example, the COI gene does not perform well for distinguishing closely-related species from marine animal populations, fungi or cnidarians. 
          In other plant and animal groups, some recently diverged species are indistinguishable from related species and can even be more similar to each 
          other in barcode genes than individuals within a single species. 
          <br />
          <br /> 
          Equipped with this knowledge, we are now able to improve methods using a reference library for determining a species with improved reliability 
          from an unknown sequence. An important insight has been that a regional, geographically-limited reference library like the “Swedish DNA key” 
          can be a well-functioning species identification tool for groups where problems have occured when referencing a global database. The reason is 
          exactly the same as why a traditional determination key is easier to make for species found only in Sweden (or Fennoscandia: Sweden, Norway, Finland) 
          than to all the world's species - pick out every other leaf on the tree of life and the differences become larger (longer genetic distances) between 
          the remaining leaves, which are, therefore, easier to distinguish.  
        </h:panelGroup>

        <p:spacer height="20"/> 

        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="subheader text"  layout="block" >
          <h:outputText value="#{msg.dnatext3}" />  
        </h:panelGroup> 
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="text"  layout="block"  >
          To identify species from an unknown sample, we first need to sequence the standardized gene region that is represented in the Swedish DNA key reference 
          library. If you do not have your own molecular laboratory, then you can send the sample to a lab that can do so for you. The cost of DNA sequencing has 
          decreased greatly during the past few years, especially if you process many samples simultaneously. The DNA sequence that one receives afterwards is a 
          plain text file, a text string approximately 650 letters long with the letters A, C, T, and G in various combinations and repetitions. The letters represent 
          four elements, the so-called nitrogenous bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine), which binds together the DNA structure (the double helix). This text 
          string of letters can be copied and pasted into the Swedish DNA key to query the web portal, compared with all sequences in the reference library. From this, 
          a species identification is delivered, or a species list if the sample included more than one species, provided that the organism group for your unknown sequence 
          is actually represented in the reference database.
        </h:panelGroup>
        <p:spacer height="20"/> 
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="subheader text"  layout="block" >
          <h:outputText value="#{msg.dnatext4}" /> 
        </h:panelGroup>

        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="text"  layout="block" > 
          For a web portal like the Swedish DNA key to function well, a well-stocked reference library of known DNA sequences is needed for comparison to unknown sequences. 
          First, the reference library must contain sequences of at least all the species in a group of organisms from which an unknown sequence may have originated. 
          The Swedish DNA key started as a  
          <h:outputLink value="http://www.formas.se"   title="The Swedish Research Council Formas"  target="_blank" styleClass="linktext">  
            <h:outputText value="Formas"   /> 
          </h:outputLink>  
          -funded project to build a reference library for Swedish vertebrates (birds, mammals, fish, amphibians, and reptiles). For this organism group, the current Swedish 
          DNA key is relatively comprehensive and has known reference sequences for 75-82% of those in Sweden commonly occurring species. Here you often get an accurate result 
          if you are looking for in the Web Sites. For other groups of animals, plants and fungi, the Swedish DNA key is in an initial development phase and will be improved 
          during the upcoming years.
          <br /> 
          <br />
          Second, there are high quality standards for the sequences compiled in a reference database. These quality standards have been developed by an international working 
          group of international cooperation in CBOL (Consortium for the Barcode of Life). The most important requirement, and what distinguishes a barcode database from 
          <h:outputLink value="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank"  title="GenBank"  target="_blank" styleClass="linktext" >  
            <h:outputText value="GenBank" /> 
          </h:outputLink> , 
          is that the sequences are linked to a "voucher" or reference specimen. The reference specimen is the individual animal, plant or fungus from which the gene has been 
          sequenced. This specimen is stored, curated and made available at a public institution where researchers can borrow or go study it in order to reassess the determination. 
          Swedish DNA key sequences are linked to records presented in the Swedish web portal,

          <h:outputLink value="#{msg.naturarvUrl}"   title="Naturarv"  target="_blank" styleClass="linktext">  
            naturarv
          </h:outputLink> ,

          with detailed information on voucher specimens housed at Swedish natural history collections. When you get a hit and determination from a reference sequence whose voucher 
          specimen is stored at a Swedish natural history collection, you can follow the link to this record on naturarv where you can find collecting data for and, often, 
          photographs of the individual.
        </h:panelGroup>

        <p:spacer height="20"/>
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="subheader text"  layout="block" >
          <h:outputText value="#{msg.dnatext5}" /> 
        </h:panelGroup>
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="text"  layout="block" > 
          #{msg.dnatext6} 
        </h:panelGroup>
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="dnatext"  layout="block" > 
          CTAATTTTTGGGGCCTGAGCGGGCATGGTTGGAACCGCCCTCAGCCTGCTCATTCGCGCAGAAC
          TCGGTCAACCAGGAACCCTACTAGGAGACGACCAGATCTACAACGTAATCGTCACTGCCCATGC
          CTTCGTAATAATCTTCTTTATAGTCATACCAATCATAATCGGGGGCTTTGGAAACTGACTAGTC
          CCCCTTATAATCGGCGCCCCAGACATAGCGTTCCCCCGTATAAATAACATAAGCTTCTGACTAC
          TCCCCCCATCCTTCCTTCTCCTACTAGCCTCCTCCACCGTAGAAGCTGGTGCTGGTACAGGGTG
          AACAGTCTACCCCCCTCTAGCTGGTAATCTGGCCCACGCCGGAGCTTCTGTAGACCTAGCCATC
          TTCTCCCTACACCTCGCTGGAGTCTCATCAATCCTAGGTGCAATCAACTTCATCACTACTGCCA
          TTAACATAAAGCCCCCGGCCCTATCTCAATACCAAACCCCCCTATTCGTATGATCCGTACTAAT
          CACAGCCGTCCTACTATTACTTTCACTGCCCGTCCTCGCTGCCGGCATTACAATGCTCCTCACA
          GACCGAAACCTAAACACCACATTCTTTGACCCAGCCGGAGGAGGAGACCCAGTCCTATACCAAC
          ACCTATTC
        </h:panelGroup>
        <br /> 
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="text"  layout="block" > 
          #{msg.dnatext7}
        </h:panelGroup>
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="dnatext"  layout="block" > 
          CTAATCTTCGGTGCATGAGCTGGCATGGTCGGAACCGCCCTCAGCCTGCTTATTCGTGCAGAAC
          TAGGCCAACCAGGAACCCTCTTGGGAGATGACCAAATCTACAATGTAATCGTTACTGCTCATGC
          ATTCGTAATAATTTTCTTCATAGTTATACCAATCATGATCGGAGGATTTGGAAATTGACTAGTC
          CCACTCATAATCGGCGCCCCCGACATAGCATTTCCTCGTATAAACAATATAAGCTTCTGACTAC
          TCCCCCCATCATTCCTATTATTACTAGCATCCTCTACAGTAGAAGCTGGAGCTGGCACAGGATG
          AACAGTATATCCACCCCTCGCCGGCAACCTAGCCCACGCAGGAGCCTCAGTAGACCTAGCTATT
          TTCTCCCTCCATTTAGCAGGTGTCTCCTCCATCCTAGGTGCCATTAACTTTATCACCACTGCCA
          TTAACATAAAACCACCAGCCCTGTCCCAATACCAAACACCCCTATTTGTATGATCAGTACTCAT
          TACCGCCGTCTTACTGCTACTCTCACTCCCAGTCCTTGCTGCCGGCATCACCATGCTATTAACA
          GATCGTAATCTAAACACCACATTCTTTGACCCAGCCGGAGGAGGAGACCCAGTCCTATACCAAC
          ATCTCTTC
        </h:panelGroup>
        <br />

        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="text"  layout="block" > 
          One can represent the four nitrogen bases A, C, T and G of a gene's DNA sequence with four differently colored lines, which provides 
          a more effective visual overview. This visualization clearly emphasizes the analogy with product barcodes and why this method has been 
          called "DNA barcoding".
          <br />
          <br />
          European Roller top, bottom Woodcock: the same sequences as above. Do you see the differences? (hint: look, for example, at the very beginning of the barcode)
          <br />
          <br /> 
        </h:panelGroup>
        <p:graphicImage value="/resources/images/barplot_blakraka.png"  alt="barplot_blakraka"  
                        title="barplot_blakraka" styleClass="images" style="padding-left: 12px;"  /> 

        <br />
        <br /> 
        <p:graphicImage value="/resources/images/barplot_morkulla.png"  alt="barplot_morkulla" 
                        title="barplot_morkulla" styleClass="images" style="padding-left: 12px;"   /> 
        <br />
        <br /> 
        <p:graphicImage value="/resources/images/referensexemplar.jpg"  alt="referensexemplar" 
                        title="referensexemplar" styleClass="images"   /> 

        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="imgtext text"  layout="block" > 
          #{msg.dnatext8} 
          <h:outputLink value="#{msg.naturarvUrl}?#{blast.urlEncode}20106015"  
                        title="Naturarv"  target="_blank" styleClass="linktext" >  
            <h:outputText  value="(Cat. id. NRM 20106015)"  styleClass="#{metadata.textColor}"  />    
          </h:outputLink>   
          #{msg.dnatext9}  
          <h:outputLink  value="#{msg.naturarvUrl}?#{blast.urlEncode}20046331"  
                         title="Naturarv"  target="_blank" styleClass="linktext">  
            <h:outputText  value="(Cat. id. NRM 20046331)"  styleClass="#{metadata.textColor}"  />    
          </h:outputLink>  
          #{msg.dnatext10} 
          <br /> 
          <br /> 
        </h:panelGroup>

        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="subheader text"  layout="block" >
          <h:outputText value="#{msg.dnatext11}" /> 
        </h:panelGroup>

        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="text"  layout="block" > 
          Now then, for what purposes can DNA barcoding be used? There is a wide range of applications for DNA barcoding in our society. The major advantage of DNA-based 
          species identification is that it works equally well for all forms or life stages of an organism - whether you have samples from eggs, larvae, nymphs, larvae, 
          juveniles, pupae, or adults. Forensic detectives, for example, need to identify different insects as eggs or larvae in a body that has been in the woods in order 
          to determine the time of death.
          <br /> 
          <br /> 
          Samples from environmental monitoring can, in many cases, consist of organisms in larval stages that are difficult to identify to species level.
          <br /> 
          <br />

          DNA-based species identification works equally well whether you have the whole or only part of an organism, for example, a leaf, a feather, a seed, a blood 
          sample, a fillet, a steak, or a non-fruiting fungal mycelium. Airport security officers may need to identify which species of bird which led to an incident 
          involving a damaged motor based on blood or feather residues. In North America and Europe, DNA identification of fish fillets has revealed widespread consumer 
          deception at both restaurants and markets.
          <br />
          <br/>

          DNA-based species identification also works on partially processed products as half-cooked lasagna, frozen fish fillets, leather bags, fur coats, feces, or stomach 
          contents. Food inspection is an example of where one can identify the raw material used even after the product is no longer possible to identify with the naked eye – 
          the horse lasagna scandal is one example. Similarly, customs officers have to verify whether leather or fur products such as clothes, bags or shoes crossing the border 
          are illegal when they are suspected of having been made from a CITES protected species.
          <br /> 
          <br />
          That even feces or gut content samples can be used in obtaining species determinations opens up new doors in diet analysis, wildlife management, ecosystem research, 
          food web reconstruction, and biological control. In an EU-funded project, gray seal diet in the Baltic Sea was analyzed by DNA sequencing of stomach contents. It is 
          also possible to determine which plants are eaten by animals by sequencing stomach contents when there is a reference library of relevant plant species for the 
          comparisons. With a reference library of angiosperms can find out which species of bees, bumble bees and flies that pollinate crops and orchards by sequencing pollen 
          on their legs.
          <br /> 
          <br />

          DNA-based species identification has begun to be used by government agencies in the US and Canada for the analysis of environmental monitoring samples, such as in 
          aquatic environments. This provides a higher taxonomic resolution because often a greater proportion of the sample can be identified to species. Even in Sweden DNA-based 
          identification is now being tested. In environmental monitoring of Baltic Sea and Gulf of Bothnia bottom sediment, the percentage of spring mosquito larvae that can be 
          identified at species increases from 10-15% to 90%, leading to a far more accurate environmental description. One can imagine that the DNA-based identification can open 
          up for environmental monitoring of a wider representation of Sweden's diversity, even for groups that were previously considered too difficult to identify.
          <br /> 
          <br /> 
        </h:panelGroup>

        <p:graphicImage value="/resources/images/miljoovervakning.jpg"  alt="#{msg.dnatext12}"  title="referensexemplar" styleClass="images"   /> 

        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="imgtext text"  layout="block" > 
          #{msg.dnatext13}<br /><br />
        </h:panelGroup> 
        <h:panelGroup  styleClass="text"  layout="block" > 
          Because organisms emit DNA into the environment, one can even detect species' presence without seeing any of the organisms just by taking, for example, a sample of water or 
          soil. This technique is starting to be used in programs for early detection of invasive species, ballast water inspection on ships, field inventories for endangered species, 
          and more.
          <br /> 
          <br />

          There is a long list of additional applications that could be mentioned. Several countries have collaborative programs at schools, where there are many possibilities to 
          conduct engaging science lab experiments that can apply DNA-based species identification to samples collected by the students themselves.
          <br /> 
          <br />

          DNA barcoding has come so far that it is an available tool for all kinds of agencies and organizations. It is now often neither more difficult or expensive to use DNA 
          to identify species or individuals than classical studies of the species' appearance. In addition, DNA analyzes provide information on species in situations when classical 
          methods are insufficient.
          <br /> 
          <br />

          What is critical for the tool to be useful is that there must be a comprehensive reference library for the organism groups of interest for all these different applications. 
          The reference library in the current Swedish DNA key is in the construction phase, and we have relatively good coverage for some groups, such as Swedish vertebrates, but 
          limited coverage for other groups such as plants. Intense efforts are ongoing to secure funding for build a reference library for several other groups of organisms that are 
          important for applications in society.
          <br /> 
          <br />
        </h:panelGroup>   
      </h:panelGroup>  
    </ui:composition>
  </body>
</html>

